Svadhisthana Orange 
3. Manipura 
Yellow 
Below 
navel 
Below 
chest 
the 
Mesoderm 
Associated 
Endocrine 
gland 
Adrenal 
Adrenal 
the 
Endoderm 
Pancreatic 
4. Anahata 
Green 
5. Vishuddha 
Pale 
blue 
6. Agjna 
Purple 
Center of the 
chest 
(Thoracic 
vertebra) 
Thyroid and 
para thyroid 
Center of the 
forehead 
Mesoderm 
Thymus 
Endoderm 
Thyroid 
Ectoderm 
Pineal 
The six chakras- Mooladhara, Swadhisthana, Manipura, Anahat, Visuddha, and Ajna- are the most important 
ones. Along with these six chakras two more chakras also described in Ayurveda text book. 
Manas 
Below the thalamus Ectoderm 
Pituitary 
Sahasrara 
Top of the skull 
Ectoderm 
Pituitary 
Relation of chakras to energy- 
The energy that the energy wheels known as chakras provide defines life. We are infused with the universal 
life force, which gives us the ability to experience life. Consequently, chakras stand for various frequencies 
found in the cosmos. The electromagnetic energy field interacts with the chakras, transforming it into our 
bodies and allowing us to survive. It is believed that the universal energy rises from the earth, enters our 
lower chakras at the base of our spine, and then moves up into the upper chakras. Rather than being linear, 
this energy flow is cyclical and flows in both directions19. 
Charkras's balance- 
A variety of techniques are used to balance the chakras, including breathing exercises, visualization 
exercises, chanting, essential oils, quieting and stimulating fragrances, working out and meditating over the 
chakras, color, sound, and light therapy, which uses colors and sounds to balance and heal the chakras, and 
more. Energy imbalances in the body can result from imbalances in any one of the Chakras. A wide range of 
medical and psychological conditions will follow from this. Simultaneous disruption or imbalance of one or 
more Chakras is possible, as is the possibility that one Chakra's balance will lead to another's imbalance.20. 
IJRAR24C1959 
International Journal of Research and Analytical Reviews (IJRAR) 
616 
 
 
 
© 2024 IJRAR August 2024, Volume 11, Issue 3 www.ijrar.org (E-ISSN 2348-1269, P- ISSN 2349-5138) 
Concept of chakras according to Ayurveda- 
The idea of chakras is not discussed or defined in Ayurveda. Yoga literature is the only source that explains 
these Chakras; it ignores any physical or physiological basis. Nonetheless, there are significant parallels 
between Ayurvedic and Chakra beliefs. When Ayurvedic disease diagnosis is followed with Chakra healing, 
positive outcomes have been observed. Many psychosomatic problems can be fully healed when Ayurvedic 
medicine, therapies, dietary adjustments, yoga, meditation, and Chakra healing techniques and methods are 
applied with efficacy21. These chakras are discussed solely in the context of yoga literature; no anatomical or 
physiological concepts are included. Nonetheless, there is a relationship between many aspects of Ayurvedic 
medicine and Chakras. When Ayurvedic sickness diagnosis is combined with Chakra healing, positive 
results have been seen. Several psychosomatic illnesses have been completely cured when Ayurvedic 
medication, therapies, dietary changes, yoga, meditation, and chakra healing techniques and procedures are 
correctly combined22. 
 Shat-Chakra Applications in our Life - Relationship between Endocrine Gland and Shat-Chakra 
Additionally, it's thought that the hormone glands and chakras, which are dormant centers of supernormal 
energy, are related. The body's mental and emotional processes are connected to their stimulation in addition 
to physical ones. Kundalini Jagrana's Sadhanas involve a methodical stimulation and penetration of the Shat 
Chakras. Examining the enduring connection between the endocrine glands and the Shat Chakras could aid 
us in comprehending, to put it technically, the effects of associated bodily processes23. 
Advantages of chakras- Numerous physical and mental illnesses can be treated with the help of chakra 
healing and balance. It is essential to properly integrate dietary and lifestyle modifications with disease-
modifying drugs. Therefore, chakra healing can be helpful as a stand-alone treatment as well as a 
combination therapy. The balancing and repair of chakras helps the body produce energy. Chakra balancing 
facilitates the body and mind's collection of positive energy and the removal of bad energy. Chakra 
balancing helps us stay resilient, strong, focused, and well-organized. Chakra balancing helps address 
hormone imbalances and glandular dysfunctions, which are the underlying causes of many illnesses24. 
Discussion- 
While some yogic books list seven Chakras, some only include five or six. The lowest chakra is located in 
the cervix of the female body and the perineal floor of the male body. The word chakra means literally 
"wheel," and it refers to an energy point or node in the subtle body. They are associated with interactions 
that are physical, emotional, and mental in nature and are thought to as centers of life force. They are also 
believed to give the physical body more vitality. The neurological and endocrine systems coordinate and 
regulate the activities of the numerous body parts to maintain homeostasis during rest and exercise. The six-
petaled vermilion lotus known as Swadhisthana Chakra is located two fingers' width above Muladhara and is 
closely related to it. It is linked to the reproductive, urinary, and glandular systems as well as the sacral 
plexus. The tongue and sensation of taste are connected to Swadhisthana. A self-centered feeling of ego is 
aroused by its impact on the inner psyche. One of the most significant chakras, the Ajna chakra, is located at 
IJRAR24C1959 
International Journal of Research and Analytical Reviews (IJRAR) 
617 
 
© 2024 IJRAR August 2024, Volume 11, Issue 3 www.ijrar.org (E-ISSN 2348-1269, P- ISSN 2349-5138) 
the medulla oblongata at the top of the spinal column. It features two petals that are clear or silvery-grey. 
The Chakras primarily address higher intelligence above Vishuddha. Manas shakti becomes more prominent 
in the Ajna Chakra when Prana shakti's veiling potency diminishes. The command center is the Ajna chakra. 
It functions in tandem with the pineal gland, medulla oblongata, and reticular activating system. The third 
eye, or ajna chakra, is where one can see the entire subtle world. It is referred regarded be the entryway to 
emancipation. 
Conclusion- 
One of the best ways to access the different unconscious levels that are available to you is to understand the 
chakras. You can identify the kind of energy you are experiencing- pleasure, strength, love, creativity, 
intuition, and spirituality—by using the chakra model. As a map of the inner world, it is an easy notion to 
grasp but profound. One of the seven chakras animates each of these seven energy levels. The relationships 
between Manas, Sharira, and Atma are interconnected. As a result, the subject of Shatchakra and the 
Shareera Vignana are most closely related. Eliminating Trividha Dukha (Adidaivika, Adhyatmika, and 
Adibhoutika) and reaching Moksha, or being rid of all ailments, are the primary goals of Ayurveda and 
Darshana Shastra. In conclusion, knowledge of the Shat Chakra is both therapeutic and preventive, and it is 
essential to achieving the objective (Moksha). 
References- 
1. Saraswati S S. Asana Pranayama Mudra Bandha. 1st ed. Munger, Bihar, India: Yoga publication trust, 
2009. 
2. Awasthi H.H. Ph.D. (Ay) Thesis- “Study on neurophysio-anatomy in Ayurveda w.s.r. Vata Dosha. 
BHU,Varanasi, 2010. 
3.Agnivesha, Charak, Drudhbala, Charak Samhita, Sutrasthan,Vatakalakaliya Adhyaya, 12/8. Prof. Ravi 
Dutt Tripathi, Chaukhambha Orientalia, Varanasi, 2011; 82-83. 
4.Saraswati Swami Niranjanananda, Textbook of Prana and Pranayama 13th Edition, published by Yoga 
Publications Trust, Bihar, 2013; 3: 27. 
5. Fenton S (2009), Simply Chakras. Sterling Publishing Company Inc, New York, USA. 
6. Sadhguru (2017) Adiyogi: The Source of Yoga. Harper Collins Publishers, India. 
7. Grimes J (1996) A Concise Dictionary of Indian Philosophy: Sanskrit Terms Defined in English. State 
University of New York Press, USA, pp: 100-101. 
8. Balkrishna A (2017) Yog Vijnanam. Divya Prakashan Publications, Haridwar India. 
9. Sarswati Swami Satyanand, Kundlini Tantra: 2013. Bihar School Of Yoga; Yoga Publication Trust. 
Section 4. Chapter 3. Page No.203 
IJRAR24C1959 
International Journal of Research and Analytical Reviews (IJRAR) 
618 
 
© 2024 IJRAR August 2024, Volume 11, Issue 3 www.ijrar.org (E-ISSN 2348-1269, P- ISSN 2349-5138) 
10. Saraswati Swami Niranjananda, Textbook of Prana and Pranayam 13th editon, Published by Yoga 
Publication Trust, Bihar, 2013,3:27 
11. Swami Ramadev, Pranayama Rahasya (Secrets of Pranayama) with scientific factual evidences, first 
Edition 2009, Divya Prakashan, Haridwar, pg no. 117 
12. Swami Ramadev, Pranayama Rahasya (Secrets of Pranayama) with scientific factual evidences, first 
Edition 2009, Divya Prakashan, Haridwar, pg no. 106 
13. Swami Ramadev, Pranayama Rahasya (Secrets of Pranayama) with scientific factual evidences, first 
Edition 2009, Divya Prakashan, Haridwar, pg no. 106-107 
14. Hatha Yoga Pradipika, Swami Muktibodhananda, Yoga Publication Trust, Munger, Bihar, India. 2013 
Golden Jubilee edition. 
15. Swami Ramadev, Pranayama Rahasya (Secrets of Pranayama) with scientific factual evidences, first 
Edition 2009, Divya Prakashan, Haridwar, pg no.108 
16. Gherand Samhita by Swami Niranjanand Sarswati, Yoga Publication Trust, Munger, Bihar, 
Bharat.Swaran Jyanti Prakashan 2013. 
17. Mahendra S. Rachana Sharir Vigyana Tantra Sharer or Nadi Vigyana. 1st ed., Ch. 6. Varanasi: 
Chaukhambha Orientelia; 2009. p. 254. 
18. Joshi BC. Neurology in ancient India: Mooladhara chakra-Aphysiological reality. Indian J Hist Sci 1986; 
p. 153. 
19.Saraswati Swami Niranjanananda, Textbook of Prana and Pranayama 13th Edition, published by Yoga 
Publications Trust, Bihar, 2013; 3: 27-35. 
20.Chakras: Balance Your Body’s Energy for Health and Harmony yogajournal.com (and yogajournal.com), 
6-7. 
21.Kriyatmaka Anveshana of Shat Chakras. Unique Journals Of Ayurvedic and Herbal Medicines, 2013; 
1(03): 34-36. 
22. Agnivesha, Charak, Drudhbala, Charak Samhita, Su-trasthan, Vatakalakaliya Adhyaya, 12/8. Prof. 
Priyavrat Sharma, Chaukhambha, Orientalia, Varanasi, 2011; 82-83 
23. 14.Kriyatmaka Anveshana of Shat Chakras. Unique Journals Of Ayurvedic and Herbal Medicines, 2013; 
1(03): 34-36. 
24. Sarswati Swami Satyanand, Kundlini Tantra: 2013. Bihar School of Yoga; Yoga Publication Trust. 
Section 2. Chapter 1-10. Page No.72-111. 
IJRAR24C1959 
International Journal of Research and Analytical Reviews (IJRAR) 
619