Sacral chakra (swadhisthan chakras): the sacral 
chakra is locted right above the root chakra. 
a. Loction = pelvic area 
b. Associated area = kidney, bladder, reproductive 
system, genitals. 
c. Characteristics = emotions, sexuality, creativity, 
fantasies. 
is closely related 
The kidneys and bladder both function in water retention 
the kidneys are also closely related to adrenal glands 
which are responsible for stress and sexual hormons. the 
sacral chakra 
to emotions and 
independence because the adrenal glands central feelings 
of anxiety that can limit your decision and emotion 
controlling your water intake and stimulating that area 
can help regulate your stress and sexual hormones this 
will improve your emotional sexual and mental life. 
3 Solar plexus chakra (manipur chakras): the salar 
plexus chakra is the third of the chakras. 
a. Loction = between the navel and solar plexus. 
b. Associated body area = digestive system, pancreas 
liver intestines, lungs stomach. 
c. Characteristics = responsibility beliefs confidence 
discipline. 
The solar plexus is largely associated with the digestive 
tract and associated organs. the gut brain connection is a 
largely supported idea that the brain and gut frequently 
communicate issues with either can manifest in the other 
the gut is often considered a second brain due to the 
number of neurons and communication with the brain the 
solar plexus chakra affect mental funtion because 
problems in the gut area directly affect the brain a solar 
plexus imbalance is just another way of saying that your 
gut health mey be compromised and affecting your 
emotional and mental wellbeing. 
4. Heart chakra (anahat chakra): the heart chakra is 
one of the upper chakras. 
a. 
b. associated body areas = heart, circulatory system, 
loctions = center of the chest at heart level. 
lungs 
c. characteristics = love, compassion, transformation 
The heart chakra is self explanatory the heart is often 
associated with emotions and relationships so keeping 
your heart chakra open is the equivalent of keeping your 
heart open to forgiveness love and chenge good heart 
health additionally increases energy making you more 
open to important experiences in your life. the gencral 
trand with chakra is that physical health can often 
influence mental and emotional health as well. 
5. Throat chakra (vishuddha chakra): the throat chakra 
is appropriately responsible for communication and 
expression. 
a. 
b. associated body area = thyroid, esophagus, upper 
loction = neck and shuldder region 
vertebrae. 
c. characteristics = 
expression, 
communication, 
connection. 
The throat is an important part of verbal communication 
people who have an imbalanced throat chakra may be 
quiet and there fore have difficulty arrerting them selves. 
the thyroid is also important for hormones that can affect 
mood so problems with this gland can create issues is 
many parts of your life the combination of verbal 
expression and hormone contral mear this area makes the 
throat chakra an important chakra for how your project 
yourself and throat chakra means having a balance of 
good communication and being in a good mental and 
emotional state. 
6. Third eye chakra (ajna chakra): the third eye chakra 
is perhaps one of the most metaphysical chakras. 
a. Loctions = between the eyebrows. 
b. Associated body area = eye.pineal gland, brain, 
pituitary gland ears. 
c. Characteristics = 
illumination. 
vision, 
intuition, wisdom, 
The third eye has both physical and metaphysical 
implications the eye helps translate physical images into 
something that can be mentally processed. the pineal 
gland is responsible for sleep and wake cycles this glands 
is responsible for bodily functions especially awereness 
the brain is obviously important because it processes all 
physical stimuli 
is sometimes 
considered the masters gland that contrals hormones 
when the third eye chakra is imbalanced there are issues 
with processing stimuli and emotions this can be due to 
physical impedi ments or because of harmful thought 
processes that affect hormones and emotions. 
the pituitary gland 
www.wjpmr.com │ Vol 8, Issue 12, 2022. │ ISO 9001:2015 Certified Journal │ 
208 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mahesh et al. World Journal of Pharmaceutical and Medical Research 
7. Crown chakra: much like the third eye chakra the 
crown chakra is important for perception and translation. 
a. Loction = crown of head 
b. Associated body areas = nervous systems, pituitary 
gland ,pineal gland 
c. Characteristics = conscious awereness 
The pituitary gland pineal gland and nervous systems are 
all integral parts of a fully functional body if someone 
has on imbalance in hormone it can affect how they 
perceive and react to their surroundings imbalanced 
crown chakras due to gland dysfunction need to be fixed 
because perception of surroudings and consciousness are 
essential to daily function the chakras are all located in 
areas that are important for regular funtion while chakras 
seem abstract they align with bodily function that are 
important and easily 
through out side 
behaviors knowing whay chakras contral certain things 
can help you in your journey to healing. 
influenced 
Chakra Site in the body Endocrine gland Vata dosha 
1. Ajna head pituitary and pineal prana vata 
2. Vishuddha neck thyroid and parathyroid dana vata 
3. Anahat thorax thymus udana vata 
4. Manipur abdomen pancreas and adrenal samana vata 
5. Swadhisthan pelvis gonads apana vata 
6. Muladhar pelvis gonads apana vata 
Relation betwen shat chakra and vata dosha: the 
sthana of the anahat chakra is the function of the udana 
vayu is to perform vakpravrutti with the help of the kanth 
thereby establishing relationship between the vishudha 
chakra and udana vayu .the sthana of the swadisthana 
and muladhara chakra is the linga and guda the 
association between the manipur chakra and saman vayu 
is established because the sthana of the manipura chakra 
is nabhi and saman vayu is at the level of nabhi with agni 
samipastha. ajna chakra is independent of other vayus 
because it symbolises avyakta (the union of prakriti and 
purush). ayurvedic samhitas describe how the shat 
chakra and vata dosha function as a system to balance a 
persons physical and mental wellbeing according to vata 
kerma in ayurveda attempts are made to establish the 
linkage between the shat chakras and vata dosha. 
CONCLUSION 
is 
to you 
the chakra model pleasure strength 
one of the best ways to access the different levels of 
unconsciousness 
to 
that are accessible 
understand the chakras it is a straightforward system to 
grasp but it is profound as a map of the inner world you 
can identify the type of energy you are encountering 
through 
love 
creativity, intuition, and spiritualityn the seven chakras 
are the animating forces behind each of these seven 
levels of energy. knowing about chakras unconventional 
yet thorough methods of hearing the body and mind and 
curing numerous disorders include chakra balancing and 
chakra healing .living a robust immune system and 
disease free existence is made possible through daily 
meditation and chakra work.chakras are interconnected 
learing about them is a great first step but focusing on 
and becoming conscious of how to heal our energy 
centres can 
improve our over all health. energy 
imbalances in a persons chakras can be related to certain 
emotions disease symptoms or other illnesses we can 
bring our chakras into balance through meditation yoga, 
and aromatherapy although some people may not be able 
to practise affirmations or pray by becoming aware of 
these invisible chakras and signs of an imbalance we can 
try out alternative self help techniques that go beyond 
using things like food alcohal, or meditation to addres 
emotional and physical issues. 
REFERENCES 
1. Agnivesha, charak, Drudhbala, Charak Samhita, 
Sutrasthan, Vatakalakaliya Adhyaya, 12/8. Prof.Ravi 
Dutt Tripathi, Chaukhambha Orientalia, Varanasi, 
2011; 82-83. 
2. Saraswati Swami Niranjanananada, textbook of 
Prana and Pranayama 13th Edition published by 
Yoga Publications Trust Bihar, 2013; 3; 27. 
3. Gupta A. Acritical Study on Manipura Chakra its 
Anatomical Correlates and Clinical Significance 
(Unpublished Masters Thesis) Varanasi Banaras 
Hindu University, 2014. 
4. Saraswati Swami Niranjanananda Textbook of Prana 
and Pranayama 13th Edition published by Yoga 
Publications Trust, Bihar, 2013; 3: 27. 
5. Chopracentermeditation.com (the Seven Chakras A 
Guide to Opening and Balancing Your Energy 
centres). 
6. Chakras Balance Your Bodys Energy for Health and 
Harmony yogajournal .com (and yogajournal.com), 
6-7. 
7. Kriyatmaka Anveshana of Shat Chakras.Unique 
Journals of Ayurvedic and Herbal Medicines, 2013; 
1(03): 34-36. 
8. Shatchakra Nirupanam- Goswami Pralhad Giri; 
Vedantkesari Krishnadas Academy; Varanasi. 
Brihatshariram P.S. Warrior; Aryavaidyshala: 
Kottakal. 
9. Shastri Vagisha, Vagyoga Kundalini Meditation 
Spiritual experiences of Meditators, Vagyoga 
publications Varanasi, 2001; 280-282. 
www.wjpmr.com │ Vol 8, Issue 12, 2022. │ ISO 9001:2015 Certified Journal │ 
209