ajna. beyond the six are two additional centres of awakening bindu and sahastrana whose perception is only 
attained at significantly advanced states of consciousness located along the spine these seven chakras each serve a 
unique purpose.the great science of kundalini yoga which is concerned with arousing the chakras has developed 
from knowledge of these psychic centres of the sukshma sharir which govern a range of functions. and shat chakra 
is currently in effect an old practise known as nirupan deals with a particular type of tantric yoga known as 
kundalini yoga the knowledge of shat chakras is based on the relationship of consciousness, mind, and soul with 
various nadi kandra (nerve centres) present in the meru dandy which was discovered by the hindu masters of the 
science of yoga .each centre in the brain has its own power and can be energised and activated by focusing on a 
particular chakras in the body (vertebral column) due to their connections to particular bodily glands or glandular 
systems chakras are sometimes known as the bodys subtle glands numerous illnesses affecting the body and mind 
can be treated by balancing and mending the chakras.chakras healing can therefore be helpful as an individual 
therapy as well as a combined therepy since effective blending of illnesses modifying and dietary and lifestyle 
adjustments is needed. 
KEYWORDS: Shat chakras, ayurveda. 
SHAT CHAKRAS HISTORY: 
they are many 
interpretations of both the meaning and history of the 
chakra system chakras are referenced in new age yoga 
classes on a regular basis but they are nothing new 
spawning from ancient tradition chakras were likely 
spoken of far before they were scrawled or paper.its 
believed yoga was created around the chakras with the 
goal of balancing both the mind and body much like its 
circular namesake countless people are circling back to 
this ancient philosophy to manage demanding lives more 
than 2000 yr. ago chakras first referenced in ancient 
hindu texts called the vedas. 200 BC. chakras described 
in the yoga sutras of patanjali,600AD chakras descritred 
in the yoga upanishads of texts with some of the first 
references of hindu buddhist and jain beliefs. 10th 
century padaka pancaka written with descriptions of the 
chakras and their function gorakshas shatakam written 
with instruction for meditating on the chakras. 1960 s 
interest in eastern spirituality and healing gained steam 
in the wastern world bringing with it a new accepting 
attitude toward the chakra system. 
INTRODUCTION 
Chakras are on ancient concept but paralleling chakra 
function with bodily function with bodily function shows 
that the associations but these centers and the physical 
body are very strong.if you have ever wondered if there 
are more concrete ways to view chakras stay tuned for a 
lessan on how anatomy and chakras align. 
www.wjpmr.com │ Vol 8, Issue 12, 2022. │ ISO 9001:2015 Certified Journal │ 
207 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mahesh et al. World Journal of Pharmaceutical and Medical Research 
1. Root chakras (Muladhar chakras): the root chakras 
is the first of the seven chakras. 
a. Loction = base of spine 
b. Associated body areas = perinium, first, three, 
vertebrae, pelvic plexus. 
c. Characteristics = security, support, physicality. 
The parineum is the area between the anus and vulva or 
anus and scrotum this means the root chakras is closely 
associatd with the genital area this has many implications 
regarding life childbirth and sexuality the first three 
vertebrae are the base of the spinal cord and are therefore 
essential to foundation and support most importantly the 
pelvic plexus is a cluster of neurons that control the 
visceral tissue responsible for eliminative and sexual 
funtion the root chakra is essentially referring to this 
genral area of the body that has a neural center and 
supporting vertebrae this explans why the root chakra is 
accredited with being a center for the physical body 
advice to open up a blocked root chakra often involves 
engaging with the earth through activities like hiking 
gardening and eating healthy these behaviors would help 
improving digestion 
the body by 
this part of 
strengthening the core and energizing yourmind. 
2.