Muladhara. Beyond the six there are two more centers of waking, Bindu and 
Sahastrara. Only very advanced phases of awareness may allow perception of these centers3. In Ayurveda, 
one can achieve Moksha through yoga. According to Yoga Shastra, the Sukshma sharira is a part of our 
body and the moderator of the entire body. The Chakras have been discovered in India by yogis, rishis, and 
sages from many faiths4. 
Historical point of view of Chakras- 
Between 1700 and 1100 BCE, the Brahma Upanishad, the Yogatattva Upanishad, and the Vedas include the 
first reference of chakras. These Vedic models were used to build the Tantric Shakti theory of the chakras 
and the Vajrayana concept of Tibetan Buddhism5. There are different numbers of chakras in different yoga 
styles. Early Buddhist literature mentioned four chakras, which were later expanded upon. Some talked 
about one hundred and twelve chakras, while others focused on just seven.Arthur Avlon's translation of two 
Indian texts, the Sat-Cakra-Nirupana and the Padaka-Pancaka, into his book The Serpent Power popularized 
the idea of seven major Chakras in the West.6. 
The Vedas, 
the 
oldest 
known 
text, 
refers 
to 
the 
eight 
chakras 
as 
"Astachakra 
navadvaradevanampurayodhya". Three of the eight are linked to the brain, while five are situated on the 
spinal cord. Each chakra is associated with an endocrine organ, which facilitates the opening of blocked 
energy centers 7. The existence of chakras has been extensively documented in the literature, but little is 
known about how they form in the developing human body during embryogenesis. It makes sense to look 
into how the fetal chakra system develops and affects the child's growth because the fetus spine is one of the 
earliest structures to form and the spine contains the Chakra system8. 
IJRAR24C1959 
International Journal of Research and Analytical Reviews (IJRAR) 
614 
 
 
 
 
© 2024 IJRAR August 2024, Volume 11, Issue 3 www.ijrar.org (E-ISSN 2348-1269, P- ISSN 2349-5138) 
Sadachakras- 
The most significant chakras are Mooladhara, Swadhisthana, Manipura, Anahat, Visuddha, and Agjna. 
There are six chakras throughout the spine, and each serves a different function. These chakras are 
positioned at regular intervals, one above the other. The six chakras function as switches to open and close 
different parts of the brain. Higher brain centers receive the waking that takes place in the chakras through 
the nadis. Another chakra is described in Ayurvedic literature.9 The ultimate culmination of the Kundalini 
Shakti, Sahasrara "is supreme." Higher consciousness is housed there. Sahasrara is physically connected to 
the pituitary gland, which is found at the top of the skull and regulates every gland and system in the body. 
Mooladhara Chakra- Muladhara, the first Chakra, represents the point in human spiritual progress where 
consciousness transcends that of an animal and begins to resemble that of a true human being. Additionally, 
it represents the final stage of animal evolution. It is believed that many lower chakras, extending from 
Muladhara Chakra to the heels, are in charge of the evolution of instinctive and intellectual traits found in 
both humans and animals. The Chakras related to the emergence of the higher man, or superman, and 
enlightenment are located upward from Muladhara Chakra. The Muladhara Chakra governs all aspects of a 
man's sexual and excretory systems.10 It is located in the pelvic floor and correlates with the nerves that 
make up the coccygeal plexus. It is located in the male body between the excretory and urinary openings and 
takes the form of the perineal body, a small dormant gland. It is located inside the posterior surface of the 
cervix in the female body.11 
Swadhisthana- At the base of the spinal cord, or the point of termination, is the second Chakra, or 
Swadhisthana. It governs the unconscious in humans and correlates to the sacral plexus of nerves12. 
 Manipura- Manipura, the third Chakra, is located precisely at the navel in the spinal column. It is matched 
to the solar plexus and is in charge of all bodily functions related to digestion, absorption, and temperature 
regulation13.